In this video we'll see how C++ looks for catch handlers when an exception is thrown.
Suppose we have a function and it throws an exception if the function doesn't handle its own exception
then the function terminates and it's removed from the call stack then C++ looks at the cost stack to
determine the function.
That's now at the top.
Since that function must have called the function that just terminated if this function used the try
block then the catch handlers are checked for a match.
And if one is found it fires and we keep processing as we've seen in the examples already.
But if there is no try block or there is a try block but it doesn't have a catch handler that matches
then the function is removed from the call stack and the process repeats.
This is called stack unwinding.
If we get to the main function and the exception is handled there either then the program terminates.
Since the exception was not handled remember what happens when a function is removed or pop from the
stack all of its local variables are destroyed.
This means that for local objects there are destructors are called.
If we have to free memory with delete then these statements may not execute at all and we will leak
memory.
This makes it critical that you implement classes that require resources as are a classes.
We talked about RAII in the smart pointers section of the course.
Make sure that you clean up your resources and your destructors.
Since you never know when they might be called and you don't want to leak any memory or leave files
or resources in unstable states stack unwinding is one of those things that's best understood with an
example.
So let's head over to the idea and show you an example of a program and how stack unwinding works.
OK so I mean the idea I mean the Section 18 workspace in the stack unwinding project and what I've got
here is some really simple function calls.
There is no exception handling there's no throwing there's no ketching there's nothing special going
on here.
We will add that in a minute.
This is our base case so I just want to go over this to make sure that you understand what happens when
we've got this function calling.
So let's start here.
Here's my stack.
Remember all this happens in the stack.
So here's my stack.
Remember all the function calls happen on the stack.
So I've got my main.
So that means that I've got main on the stack.
So main is activated on the stack.
We print out starting main and then we call function.
A function as a peer function gets pushed on the stack.
So this would be function here and it displays starting functions.
Then it calls function B.
So we go to a function B now function B gets pushed on the stack it displays starting function B it
calls function C and functions C is put on the stack.
So you can see it's a real nice orderly process of function calling it displays starting function c
then it displays any function C then it's popped off the stack B completes now and says ending function
B and it's popped off the stack a says ending function a.
It's popped off the stack.
Finally we're back here and we end up printing finishing main.
OK so each function announces itself and then it says I'm done.
And if we run this project to clear the screen here and if we run this project what we'll get is exactly
what I just said.
Let me move this over here so we can see it here you can see we're starting main then we're calling
function a function B functions C and now we're starting to unwind write our programs finishing so function
C's done function B is done function is done and then Man this is what you would expect.
This is normal control flow when there is no exception handling.
Now we're going to do is we're going to add a couple of throws in here and a catch.
So you can see exactly what happens when we're doing stack unwinding with exception handling remember
exception handling.
Definitely could change the normal control flow of your program.
So this is the normal flow of our program assuming we've got no exception handling and no exceptions
and no problems at all.
All right.
So let's say that functions C throws an exception and would just throw 100 we could throw anything.
The point is we're throwing an exception.
So I'm just going to throw a hundred here and in my main where I call function a right here I'm going
to enclose it in a try block.
So there's my try block
and I'll indent that.
And then what I'll do is put a catch handler here and that will expect an integer by ref will call it
X and we'll just write something like stood out.
Let's just say caught air in main something real simple like that.
Now let's walk through this and see what we expect to happen.
We're here.
Maine begins and it prints out starting May actually let me close this up just a little bit so I've
got a little bit more room to work
OK.
Perfect.
Everything fits just right.
OK so we're here in Maine and we're going to print out starting May.
Now we're going to try function a function could throw an exception.
So I'm coming over here.
I call function and it prints out starting functions and it calls function B function B begins displays
function b starting function B it calls function C which displays starting functions C now it throws
an exception what does that mean.
That means that this function is now done because it's not catching its own exception here.
So this code right here will not execute.
We will never see this function complete normally because it's being pulled off the stack right now.
Now what happens.
Well now we go back to whoever called function C which was function B.
So now we're back here and doesn't have a catch handler for an integer no.
So this guy gets popped off the stack.
Right so this won't execute either.
We go back to a.
Right because a call be it doesn't have a catch handler.
This won't execute either.
And now we finally get back to the main the main does have a catch handler.
This will fire and our program will finish normally.
But what's happened on the stack is real real different.
Right.
You notice these three functions got ripped off the stack immediately.
All its local variables were destroyed destructors were called.
If if any.
So you've got to be real careful with your objects here make sure that are destructors are correct because
they're just got called and they didn't get called as you expected them to be called.
So let's run this and see the output now.
And notice the output how different it is from before we're Main.
We're starting a we're starting beat We're starting see right just as we said now see throws an exception
right here on 9:23 it doesn't catch it.
So Saez gone right now.
Notice how the ending function C is never called.
We go back to be it doesn't catch an integer it's gone.
We never see the ending function B.
We go back to function a.
It doesn't catch it either.
So notice what happens here.
Right we never see the ending function message.
We finally come back to the main main catches the exception.
There you go caught error in Maine and it finishes normally.
So this is a good example of stack unwinding you can see exactly what's going up at that chain right
now.
If I do something like Let's try in function B let's say right here
let's say that we're going to call function c.
Let's just try to call function see and see what happens.
And in this case we can catch the integer.
And what I'll do is I'll copy that output statement that I created just down here in main real quick.
And I'll paste it right in here.
And I'll just simply say caught error in this function be.
OK so now let's walk through this example and see what's going on.
Let me close this up again and I'll scroll up just a little bit.
So hopefully we can fit it all in here.
OK.
That's a function a laptop.
All right.
So here's main portraying functioning function a could throw an exception or anything called by function
it could throw an exception as well some calling function.
It says starting a function and it calls function B function B displays starting function B and it tries
to execute function c.
So what's going to happen here is function c executes and it throws an exception.
This will not execute function c is now gone.
But now we come back and function B is handling the exception.
So now this will work and this will work.
And from now on.
Function B and then function a.
All execute normally.
OK.
So let's run this and see what we get.
All right look at this.
What have we got we've got starting main than we're starting.
A We're starting B and we're starting see now C throws that error right.
So C is gone.
Notice how the ending C is never printed.
We catch the error right here on line 21 and then we continue normally because we've handled the exception.
So we've got Ending B and then we come back here and say and finally we finish off our man.
So this is stack unwinding.
I encourage you to play around with this example put some throws and catches.
It's really the only way to really understand it is to play with it put some try some ketches throw
in different places and see what's happening and you'll be able to trace through this and once you really
understand what's going on you'll definitely understand exception handling and end up stack unwinding.
And it's critical that you understand that because remember things are going to get thrown off the stack
so you've got to be sure that you're handling your resources correctly.